[Music]
if daily starts I was at a friend's
house and she had on her shelf a copy of
the DSM manual which is the manual of
mental disorders it lists every known
mental disorder and it used to be back
in the 50s a very slim pamphlet America
bigger and bigger and bigger and now
it's 886 pages long and it lists
currently 374 mental disorders so I was
leafing through it wondering if I had
any mental disorders and it turns out
I've got 12
I've got generalized anxiety disorder
which is a given
I've got nightmare disorder which is
categorized if you have recurrent dreams
of being pursued or declared to failure
and all my dreams involve people chasing
me down the street going you're Bailey
I've got parent-child relationship
problems which I blame my parents for
I'm kidding
I'm not kidding I'm kidding and I've got
malingering and I think it's actually
quite rare to have both malingering and
generalized anxiety disorder because
malingering tends to make me feel very
anxious anyway I was looking through
this book wondering if I was much
crazier than I thought I was or maybe
it's not a good idea to diagnose
yourself with a mental disorder if
you're lots of trains professional or
maybe the psychiatry profession has a
kind of strange desire to label what's
essentially normal human behavior as a
mental disorder I didn't know which of
these things was true but I thought it
was kind of interesting and I thought
maybe I should meet a critic of
Psychiatry to get their view which is
how I ended up having lunch with the
Scientologists it was a man called Brian
who runs a crack team of Scientologists
who were determined to destroy
psychiatry wherever it lies there called
the CCHR and I said to him can I can you
prove to me that psychiatry is a
pseudoscience that can't be trusted
and he said yes we can prove it to you
and I said how and he said we can
introduce you to Tony and I said who's
Tony and he said Tony's in broad
brought Boris Broadmoor Hospital he used
to be known as the Broadmoor asylum for
the criminally insane that's where they
said that serial killers and the people
who can't help themselves and I said too
bad more what did toady do that he said
hardly anything
he beat someone up or something and he
decided to fake madness to get out of a
prison sentence but he faked it too well
and now he's stuck in Broadmoor and
nobody will believe he's sane do you
want us to try and get you into
Broadmoor to meet Tony so I said yes
please so I got the train to Broadmoor I
began to yawn uncontrollably around
Kempton Park which apparently is what
dogs also do when anxious they yawn
uncontrollably and we got to learn more
I got taken through gate after gate
after gate after gate into the Wellness
Center which is where you get to meet
the patients it looks like a giant
Hampton Inn it's all Beach and pine and
carving colors and the only bold colors
are the Reds of the panic buttons
had the patient started drifting in
and they were quite overweight wearing
sweat pants and quite docile looking and
Brian the Scientologists whispered to me
then medicated which to the
Scientologists is like the worst evil in
the world but I'm figured it's probably
a good idea and then Brian said here's
Tony and a man was walking in and he
wasn't overweight he was in very good
physical shape and he wasn't wearing
sweat pants he was wearing a pinstripe
suit and he had his arm outstretched
like someone out on the apprentice
he looked like a man who wanted to wear
an outfit that would convince me that he
was very sane and he sat down and I said
so is it true that you faked you were in
here and he said yep yep absolutely I
beat someone up when I was 17 I was in
prison awaiting trial and my cellmate
said to me you know we have to do faked
madness
tell him you're mad you'll get sent to
some cushy hospital nurses have bring
your pizzas we love you a Playstation I
said well how did you do it say well ask
to see the prison psychiatrist and I
just seen a film called crash in which
people get sexual pleasure from crashing
cars into walls so I said to the
psychiatrist I get sexual pleasure from
crushing cars into walls and I said what
else he said oh yeah I told the
psychiatrist that I wanted to watch
women as they died because it would make
me feel more normal and I said where to
get loud from he's all from a biography
of Ted Bundy that they had at the prison
library
anyway faked madness - well he said and
they didn't send him some cushy hospital
they sent him to Broadmoor and the
minute he got there said it's what one
look at the place asked to see the
psychiatrist said there's been a
terrible misunderstanding I'm not
mentally ill I said how long have you
been here for he said well if I just
done my time in prison for the original
crime I'd have got five years I've been
in Broadmoor for 12 years Tony said that
it's a lot harder to convince people
you're sane than it is to convince him
you're crazy yes I thought the best way
to seem normal would be to talk to
people normally about normal things like
football or what's on TV I subscribe to
new scientists and recently they had an
article about the US Army was trailing
bumblebees to the fat explosives
so I said to a nurse did you know that
the US Army's training bumblebees to
sniff out explosives when I read my
medical notes I saw they'd written
believes bees can sniff out explosives
he said you know they're always looking
up for non-verbal clues to my mental
state but how do you sit in a sane way
how do you cross your legs in the same
way it's just impossible and when Tony
said that to me I thought to myself am I
sitting like a journalist crossing my
legs like a journalist he said you know
I've got the Stockwell strangler on one
side of me and I've got the tiptoe
through the tulips rapist on the other
side of me so I tend to stay in my room
a lot because I found quite frightening
and they take Dad as a sign of madness
they say it proves that I'm aloof and
grandiose so only in Broadmoor would not
wanting to hang out with serial killers
be a side of madness anyway he seemed
completely normal to me but what did I
though but I've got home I emailed his
punished and honestly made and I said
what's the story and he said yep we
accept that toady faked madness to get
out of a prison sentence because his
hallucinations that had seemed quite
cliched to begin with just vanished the
minute he got to Broadmoor however we
have assessed him and we've determined
that what he is is a psychopath and in
fact faking madness is exactly the kind
of cunning and manipulative acts of a
psychopath so on the checklist coming
manipulative so faking your brain going
wrong is evidence that your brain has
gone wrong and I spoke to other experts
and they said the pinstripe suit classic
psychopath speak of items 1 & 2 on the
checklist glibness superficial charm a
grandiose sense of self-worth and I said
well I said the one in hang out with the
the other patients classic psychopath it
speaks to grandiosity adore so lack of
empathy so all the things that has
seemed most normal about Tony was
evidence according to his clinician that
he was mad in this new way he was a
psychopath and his clinician said to me
if you want to know more about
Psychopaths he can go on a Psychopaths
spotting course run by Robert hare who
invented the psychopathy checklist so I
did so I went on a Psychopaths possum
course and I am now
[Music]
a certified and I have to say extremely
adept it's like a bats gotta so here's
the statistics one in a hundred regular
people is a psychopath so there's 1500
people in this room 15 of you are
psychopaths
[Music]
although that figure rises to four
percent of CEOs and business leaders so
I think there's a very good chance is
about 30 or 40 Psychopaths in this room
it could be carnage by the end of the
night has said the reason why is because
capitalism at its most ruthless rewards
psychopathic behavior the lack of
empathy the glibness
cunning manipulative in fact capitalism
perhaps at its most remorseless is a
physical manifestation of psychopathy
it's like a form of psychopathy that's
come down to affect us all the hair said
to me you know what forget about some
guy at Broadmoor who may or may not have
faked madness who cares that's not a big
story the big story he's had his
corporate psychopathy you want to go and
interview yourself some corporate
Psychopaths so I gave it a try I wrote
to the Enron people I said could I
covered it for you and prison to find
out if your Psychopaths
they didn't reply so I changed tack I
emailed chainsaw al Dunlap the asset
stripper from the 1990s he would come
into failing businesses and close down
30% of the workforce just turn American
towns into ghost towns and I emailed him
and I said I believe you may have a very
special brain anomaly that makes you
special
interested in the predatory spirit and
fearless can I come and interview you
about your special brain anomaly and he
said come on over so I went to our
deluxe grand Florida mansion that was
filled with sculptures of predatory
animals there were lions and tigers he
was taking me through the garden there
were foul cones and eagles in the center
they've got sharks and what you say
missing that less effeminate way you've
got more sharks and you've got Tigers
was like Narnia
and then we went into his kitchen
now our Dunlap would be bought in to
save failing companies he'd closed down
30% of the work for said he quite often
fire people with a joke that for
instance one famous story about him
somebody came up to him and said I've
just bought myself a new car and he said
to well you may have a new car but I
tell you what you don't have a job so in
his kitchen he was standing there with
his wife Judy and his bodyguard sword
and I said you know how I said in my
email that you might have a special
brain anomaly that makes you special and
he said he has an amazing theory it's
like Star Trek you're going where no man
has gone before
and I said well some psychologists might
say that this makes you daddy said what
and I said it's octopus and I said I've
got a listed psychopathic traits in my
pocket can I go through them with you
and he looked intrigued too despite
himself but he said okay go on
and I said okay grandiose sense of
self-worth which I have to say would
have been hard for him to deny because
he was standing underneath a giant or
your painting of himself
he said well you've got to believe in
you and I said manipulative he said
that's leadership
and I said shallow effect an inability
to experience a range of emotions he
said who wants to be weighed down by
some nonsense emotions so he was going
down the psychopath checklist basically
turning it into who moved my cheese
[Music]
but I did notice something happening to
me the day I was without Dunlap whenever
he said anything to me that was cut and
normal like he said no to juvenile
delinquency he said he got accepted into
West Point and they don't let
delinquents in West Point ease have no
too many short to marital relationships
he's only ever been married twice
admittedly his first wife cited him had
divorce papers but he once threatened
her with a knife and said he always
wanted what human flesh tasted like but
people say stupid things to each other
in bad marriages in the heat of an
argument at his second marriage has
lasted 41 years so whenever he said
anything to me that just seemed kind of
non psychopathic I thought to myself
well I'm not going to put bad in the
book and then I realized that becoming a
psychopath spotter had kind of turned me
a little bit psychopathic so I was
desperate to shove him in a box marked
psychopath I was desperate to define him
by his majesty geez I realize oh my god
this is what I've been doing for 20
years it's what all journalists do we
travel across the world with our
notepads in our hands and we wait for
the gems and the gems we'll always be
outermost aspects of our interviewees
personality we stitch them together like
medieval monks and we leave the normal
stuff on the floor and you know this is
a country that overdiagnosis certain
mental disorders hugely childhood
bipolar children as young as four are
being labeled bipolar because they have
temper tantrums which scores them high
on their bipolar checklist when I got
back to London
Tony phoned me
he said why don't you been returning my
calls I said well they say that you're a
psychopath and he said I'm not a
psychopath said you know what one of the
items on the checklist is lack of
remorse but another item on the
checklist is cunning manipulative so
when you say you feel remorse for your
crime they say typical of the psychopath
to cunningly say he feels remorse but he
doesn't is like witchcraft they turn
everything upside down he said I've got
a tribunal coming up will you come to it
so I said okay so I went to his tribunal
and after 14 years in Broadmoor let him
go they decided that he shouldn't be
held indefinitely because he scores high
on a checklist that might mean that he
would as a greater than average chance
of recidivism so they let him go and
outside of the corridor he said to me
you know what John everyone's a bit
psychopathic he said you are I am well
obviously I am
I said what are you gonna do now he said
I'm gonna go to Belgium because there's
a woman there that I fancy that she's
married so I'm going to get a splitter
from her husband
anyway that was two years ago and that's
where my book ended and the last 20
months everything was fine nothing bad
happens he was living with a girl
outside London he was according to Brian
the Scientologist making up for lost
time which I know sounds ominous but
isn't necessarily ominous unfortunately
after 20 months he did go back to jail
for a month he got into Africa in a bar
he called it and took going to jail for
a month which I know is bad but at least
a month implies that it's whatever the
frak are well was wasn't too bad and
then he phoned me and you know I think
it's right that Tony is out because you
shouldn't define people by their maddest
edges and what Tony is is a he's a semi
psychopath he's a gray area in a world
that doesn't like gray areas but the
gray areas are where you find the
complexity of them
so you founded humanity and that's where
you find the truth
and Tony said to me John
could I buy you a drink at a bar - sort
of thank you for everything you've done
for me and I didn't go what would you
have done thank you
[Applause]
[Music]